[Lang] Add ti.static_assert for compile-time assertations (#1344)
taichi-dev/taichi: docs/debugging.rst

Debugging
=========

Debugging a massive-parallelized CPU/GPU program is not easy, so Taichi provides some
builtin utilities that hopefully could help you debug your Taichi program.

> Runtime ``print`` in kernel

Reviewer: How about change ``Runtime`` to `Run-time`? Maybe ``Runtime`` are usually referred to some environment setting such as ``JVM`` or ``MSVC runtime``, and ``Run-time`` can be more precisely to say the execution of our program, and our titles could be consisitent with each other(``Run-time`` and ``Compile-time``)
```suggestion
Run-time ``print`` in kernels
```

---------------------------

Debug your program with ``print()`` in Taichi-scope. For example:

.. code-block:: python

    @ti.kernel
    def inside_taichi_scope():
        x = 233
        print('hello', x)
        #=> hello 233

        print('hello', x * 2 + 200)
        #=> hello 666

        print('hello', x, sep='')
        #=> hello233

        print('hello', x, sep='', end='')
        print('world', x, sep='')
        #=> hello233world233

        m = ti.Matrix([[2, 3, 4], [5, 6, 7]])
        print('m =', m)
        #=> m = [[2, 3, 4], [5, 6, 7]]

        v = ti.Vector([3, 4])
        print('v =', v)
        #=> v = [3, 4]

> For now, Taichi-scope ``print`` support string, scalar, vector, matrix expressions as argument.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For now, Taichi-scope ``print`` supports string, scalar, vector, and matrix expressions as the argument.
```

``print`` in Taichi-scope maybe a little different from the ones in Python-scope, see below.

.. warning::

    For the **CPU, CUDA and Metal backend**, ``print`` will not work in Graphical Python Shells
    including IDLE and Jupyter notebook, since they print the result to console, instead of GUI.
    Taichi developers are trying to solve this now. Use **OpenGL backend** if you wish to
    use ``print`` in IDLE / Jupyter.

> 

Reviewer: Let's say something about the f-string
```suggestion
.. warning::
    Note that ``print`` in Taichi-scope can only receive **comma-seperated paramater**. Neither f-string nor formatted string should be used. For example:
    .. code-block:: python
        import taichi as ti
        ti.init(arch=ti.cpu)
        a = ti.var(dt=ti.f16, shape=1)
        
        @ti.kernel
        def kern():
            a[0] = 1.0
            print('a[0] = ', a[0]) # right
            print(f'a[0] = {a[0]}') # wrong, f-string is not supported
            print("a[0] = %f" % a[0]) # wrong, formatted string is not supported
        kern()
```

.. note::

    For the **OpenGL and CUDA backend**, the printed result won't shows up until ``ti.sync()``:

    .. code-block:: python

        import taichi as ti
        ti.init(arch=ti.cuda)

        @ti.kernel
        def kern():
            print('inside kernel')

        print('before kernel')
        kern()
        print('after kernel')
        ti.sync()
        print('after sync')

    obtains:

    .. code-block:: none

        before kernel
        after kernel
        inside kernel
        after

>     Also note that host access or program end will also implicitly invoke for ``ti.sync()``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Also, please note that host access or program end will also implicitly invoke for ``ti.sync()``.
```

Compile-time ``ti.static_print``
--------------------------------

> Sometimes it's also useful to print Python-scope objects / constants like data type, SNode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Taichi-scope, sometimes it's also useful to print Python-scope objects and constants like datatype or SNode.
```
Would it be more target-oriented? ;-)

Author: ```suggestion
Sometimes it's also useful to print Python-scope objects and constants like datatype or SNode in Taichi-scope.
```

So, similar to ``ti.static`` we provide ``ti.static_print`` to print compile-time constants.

> It behave as same as Python-scope ``print`` does, just being embbed into Taichi kernel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It behaves the same as Python-scope ``print``, just being embedded into Taichi kernel.
```

.. code-block:: python

>     x = ti.var(ti.f32, (2, 3))
> 
>     @ti.kernel
>     def inside_taichi_scope():
>         ti.static_print(x.shape)
>         # => (2, 3)
>         ti.static_print(x.data_type())
>         # => DataType.float32
>         for i in range(4):
>                 ti.static_print(i.data_type())
>                 # => DataType.int32
>                 # will only print once

Reviewer: Our statement above said that, ``print`` in Taichi scope can also print Pyhton scope value.
So how about:
```suggestion
    x = ti.var(ti.f32, (2, 3))
    y = 1
    
    @ti.kernel
    def inside_taichi_scope():
        ti.static_print(y)
        # => 1
        ti.static_print(x.shape)
        # => (2, 3)
        ti.static_print(x.data_type())
        # => DataType.float32
        for i in range(4):
                ti.static_print(i.data_type())
                # => DataType.int32
                # will only print once
````

> Unlike ``print``, ``ti.static_print`` will only print the expression once at compile-time. And

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike ``print``, ``ti.static_print`` will only print the expression once at compile-time, and
```
In order to make the latter sentence has a subject :)

therefore has no runtime cost.

Runtime ``assert`` in kernel
----------------------------

We may use ``assert`` statement in Taichi-scope. When assertion condition failed, a
``RuntimeError`` will be raised to indicate error.

To make ``assert`` work, first make sure you are using the **CPU backend**.

> For performance reason, ``assert`` is only work when ``debug`` mode is on, For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For performance reason, ``assert`` only works when ``debug`` mode is on, For example:
```

.. code-block:: python

    ti.init(arch=ti.cpu, debug=True)

    x = ti.var(ti.f32, 128)

    @ti.kernel
    def do_sqrt_all():
        for i in x:
            assert x[i] >= 0
            x[i] = ti.sqrt(x)

> When your debugging work is done, set ``debug=False``. Now ``assert`` will be simply ignored
> therefore no runtime overhead, making your program easy to debug without losing performance.

Author: ```suggestion
When your debugging work is done, simply set ``debug=False``. Now ``assert`` will be ignored
therefore no runtime overhead, making your program easy to debug without losing performance.
```

Compile-time ``ti.static_assert``
---------------------------------

> Like ``ti.static_print``, we also provide a static version for ``assert``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like ``ti.static_print``, we also provide a static version of ``assert``:
```

``ti.static_assert``, it can be useful to make assertion on data type / dimention / shape.

> It works no matter wheater ``debug=True`` is specified. When assertion failure, it will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It works no matter whether ``debug=True`` is specified. When assertion fails, it will
```
HDYT?

raise ``AssertionError`` as a Python-scope ``assert`` does.

For example:

.. code-block:: python

    @ti.func
    def is_odd(x: ti.template()):

>         ti.static_assert(x.data_type() == ti.i32, "is_odd() is only supported for i32")

Author: ```suggestion
        ti.static_assert(x.data_type() == ti.i32, "is_odd() is only supported for i32")
        # When x.data_type() != ti.i32, raise AssertionError("is_odd() is only supported for i32")
```

        return x % 2 == 1

> 

Reviewer: We may give ``ti.static_assert`` a function demonstration here? so that people can realize it receive 2 parameters, the first one is assert expresstion and the second is a statement.

Author: I thought all Python users who know `assert` knows this failure message feature?

Tips for debugging
------------------

Debugging a Taichi program can be hard even with the builtin tools above.
Taichi developers are currently devoting themselves in improving error messages and warnings
to help user find potential BUGs in their programs.

Here we collected some common BUGs that one might encounter with a Taichi program:

Static typing system
++++++++++++++++++++

> Taichi pertend that it's a dynamical-typed language like Python, but it's actually a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Taichi pretends that it's a dynamical-typed language like Python, but it's actually a
```

statically-typed language which will be translated into high performance CPU/GPU instructions.

So the code behavior in Taichi-scope is actually very different from Python-scope!

Type of a variable is simply **determined at its first initialization and never changes later**.

Although static-type provides better performance and simplicity, but may leads to BUGs if
users not distinguished Taichi-scope from Python-scope, e.g.:

.. code-block:: python

    @ti.kernel
    def buggy():
        ret = 0  # 0 is a integer, so `ret` is typed as int32
        for i in range(3):
            ret += 0.1 * i  # i32 += f32, the result is still stored in int32!
        print(ret)  # will shows 0

    buggy()

> The codes above shows a common BUG due to the limitation of the static-type system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The code above shows a common BUG due to the limitation of the static-type system.
```

> The Taichi compiler should shows a warning like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Taichi compiler should show a warning like:
```

Author: Why? Wasn't Taichi compiler a singular form noun? Sorry about my poor English..

.. code-block:: none

    [W 06/27/20 21:43:51.853] [type_check.cpp:visit@66] [$19] Atomic add (float32 to int32) may lose precision.

> This means that it can not store a float32 result to int32.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that it cannot store a ``float32`` result to ``int32``.
```

> The solution is to type ``ret`` as float32 at the first place:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The solution is to type ``ret`` as ``float32`` at the first place:
```

.. code-block:: python

    @ti.kernel
    def not_buggy():
        ret = 0.0  # 0 is a floating point number, so `ret` is typed as float32
        for i in range(3):
            ret += 0.1 * i  # f32 += f32, OK!!
        print(ret)  # will shows 0.6

    not_buggy()

`@archibate <https://github.com/archibate>`_'s personal suggestion to prevent issues like this:

* Recall the ``float ret = 0;`` in C/C++, always use ``ret = float(0)`` on **initialization**,
  and ``ret = int(0)`` for integers. So that you are always clear of what type every variable.

Advanced Optimization
+++++++++++++++++++++

> Taichi has a advanced optimization engine to make your Taichi kernel to be as fast as it could.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Taichi has an advanced optimization engine to make your Taichi kernel to be as fast as it could.
```

> But like the ``gcc -O3`` does, sometimes advanced optimization can leads to BUGs as it tried

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But like the ``gcc -O3`` does, sometimes advanced optimization can lead to BUGs as it tried
```

too hard, including runtime errors like:

```RuntimeError: [verify.cpp:basic_verify@40] stmt 8 cannot have operand 7.```

You may use ``ti.core.toggle_advance_optimization(False)`` to turn off advanced
optimization and see if the issue still exists:

.. code-block:: python

    import taichi as ti

    ti.init()
    ti.core.toggle_advance_optimization()

    ...

> If that fixed the issue, please report this BUG on `GitHub <https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi/issues/new?labels=potential+bug&template=bug_report.md>`_ to help us improve, if you would like to.

Author: ```suggestion
If turning of optimization fixed the issue, please report this BUG on `GitHub <https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi/issues/new?labels=potential+bug&template=bug_report.md>`_ to help us improve, if you would like to.
```

Debugging
=========

Debugging a parallel program is not easy, so Taichi provides
builtin utilities that could hopefully help you debug your Taichi program.

Run-time ``print`` in kernels
-----------------------------

.. function:: print(arg1, ..., sep=' ', end='\n')

Debug your program with ``print()`` in Taichi-scope. For example:

.. code-block:: python

    @ti.kernel
    def inside_taichi_scope():
        x = 233
        print('hello', x)
        #=> hello 233

        print('hello', x * 2 + 200)
        #=> hello 666

        print('hello', x, sep='')
        #=> hello233

        print('hello', x, sep='', end='')
        print('world', x, sep='')
        #=> hello233world233

        m = ti.Matrix([[2, 3, 4], [5, 6, 7]])
        print('m =', m)
        #=> m = [[2, 3, 4], [5, 6, 7]]

        v = ti.Vector([3, 4])
        print('v =', v)
        #=> v = [3, 4]

For now, Taichi-scope ``print`` supports string, scalar, vector, and matrix expressions as arguments.
``print`` in Taichi-scope may be a little different from ``print`` in Python-scope, see below.

.. warning::

    For the **CPU, CUDA, and Metal backend**, ``print`` will not work in Graphical Python Shells

>     including IDLE and Jupyter notebook. This is because these backends prints the outputs to the console instead of the GUI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    including IDLE and Jupyter notebook. This is because these backends print the outputs to the console instead of the GUI.
```

It works whether ``debug=True`` is specified or not. When an assertion fails, it will
raise ``AssertionError`` as a Python-scope ``assert`` does.

For example:

.. code-block:: python

    @ti.func
    def is_odd(x: ti.template()):
        ti.static_assert(x.data_type() == ti.i32, "is_odd() is only supported for i32")
        return x % 2 == 1

Debugging Tips
--------------

Debugging a Taichi program can be hard even with the builtin tools above.

Here we showcase some common bugs that one may encounter in a Taichi program:

Static type system
++++++++++++++++++

Python code in Taichi-scope is translated into a statically typed language for high performance. This means code in Taichi-scope can have a different behavior compared with that in Python-scope, especially when it comes to types.

The type of a variable is simply **determined at its initialization and never changes later**.

Although Taichi's static type system provides better performance, it may lead to bugs if
programmers carelessly used the wrong types. For example,

.. code-block:: python

    @ti.kernel
    def buggy():

>         ret = 0  # 0 is a integer, so `ret` is typed as int32

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        ret = 0  # 0 is an integer, so `ret` is typed as int32
```

.. code-block:: none

    [W 06/27/20 21:43:51.853] [type_check.cpp:visit@66] [$19] Atomic add (float32 to int32) may lose precision.

This means that Taichi cannot store a ``float32`` result precisely to ``int32``.
The solution is to initialize ``ret`` as a float-point value:

.. code-block:: python

    @ti.kernel
    def not_buggy():
        ret = 0.0  # 0 is a floating point number, so `ret` is typed as float32
        for i in range(3):
            ret += 0.1 * i  # f32 += f32. OK!
        print(ret)  # will show 0.6

    not_buggy()

Advanced Optimization
+++++++++++++++++++++

Taichi has an advanced optimization engine to make your Taichi kernel to be as fast as it could.
But like what the ``gcc -O3`` does, sometimes advanced optimization can lead to bugs as it tries
too hard. This includes runtime errors such as:

```RuntimeError: [verify.cpp:basic_verify@40] stmt 8 cannot have operand 7.```

You may use ``ti.core.toggle_advance_optimization(False)`` to turn off advanced
optimization and see if the issue still exists:

.. code-block:: python

    import taichi as ti

    ti.init()
    ti.core.toggle_advance_optimization(False)

    ...

> If turning off optimization fixed the issue, please report this bug on `GitHub <https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi/issues/new?labels=potential+bug&template=bug_report.md>`_ to help us improve, thank for support!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If turning off optimization fixed the issue, please report this bug on `GitHub <https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi/issues/new?labels=potential+bug&template=bug_report.md>`_ to help us improve, thanks for the support!
```

Debugging
=========

Debugging a parallel program is not easy, so Taichi provides
builtin utilities that could hopefully help you debug your Taichi program.

Run-time ``print`` in kernels
-----------------------------

.. function:: print(arg1, ..., sep=' ', end='\n')

Debug your program with ``print()`` in Taichi-scope. For example:

.. code-block:: python

    @ti.kernel
    def inside_taichi_scope():
        x = 233
        print('hello', x)
        #=> hello 233

        print('hello', x * 2 + 200)
        #=> hello 666

        print('hello', x, sep='')
        #=> hello233

        print('hello', x, sep='', end='')
        print('world', x, sep='')
        #=> hello233world233

        m = ti.Matrix([[2, 3, 4], [5, 6, 7]])
        print('m =', m)
        #=> m = [[2, 3, 4], [5, 6, 7]]

        v = ti.Vector([3, 4])
        print('v =', v)
        #=> v = [3, 4]

For now, Taichi-scope ``print`` supports string, scalar, vector, and matrix expressions as arguments.

> ``print`` in Taichi-scope may be a little different from ``print`` in Python-scope, see below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``print`` in Taichi-scope may be a little different from ``print`` in Python-scope. Please see details below.
```

.. warning::

    For the **CPU, CUDA, and Metal backend**, ``print`` will not work in Graphical Python Shells
    including IDLE and Jupyter notebook. This is because these backends print the outputs to the console instead of the GUI.
    Taichi developers are trying to solve this now. Use the **OpenGL backend** if you wish to
    use ``print`` in IDLE / Jupyter.

.. warning::

>     Note that ``print`` in Taichi-scope can only receive **comma-seperated paramater**. Neither f-string nor formatted string should be used. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Note that ``print`` in Taichi-scope can only receive **comma-separated parameter**. Neither f-string nor formatted string should be used. For example:
```

        foo()
.. note::

    For the **OpenGL and CUDA backend**, the printed result will not show up until ``ti.sync()`` is called:

    .. code-block:: python

        import taichi as ti
        ti.init(arch=ti.cuda)

        @ti.kernel
        def kern():
            print('inside kernel')

        print('before kernel')
        kern()
        print('after kernel')
        ti.sync()
        print('after sync')

    obtains:

    .. code-block:: none

        before kernel
        after kernel
        inside kernel
        after

    Please note that host access or program end will also implicitly invoke ``ti.sync()``.

Compile-time ``ti.static_print``
--------------------------------

Sometimes it is useful to print Python-scope objects and constants like data types or SNodes in Taichi-scope.
So, similar to ``ti.static`` we provide ``ti.static_print`` to print compile-time constants.
It is similar to Python-scope ``print``.

.. code-block:: python

    x = ti.var(ti.f32, (2, 3))
    y = 1

    @ti.kernel
    def inside_taichi_scope():
        ti.static_print(y)
        # => 1
        ti.static_print(x.shape)
        # => (2, 3)

>         ti.static_print(x.data_type())

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        ti.static_print(x.dtype)
```

        # => DataType.float32
        for i in range(4):

>                 ti.static_print(i.data_type())

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                ti.static_print(i.dtype)
```

.. code-block:: python

    ti.init(arch=ti.cpu, debug=True)

    x = ti.var(ti.f32, 128)

    @ti.kernel
    def do_sqrt_all():
        for i in x:
            assert x[i] >= 0
            x[i] = ti.sqrt(x)

When you are done with debugging, simply set ``debug=False``. Now ``assert`` will be ignored
and there will be no runtime overhead.

Compile-time ``ti.static_assert``
---------------------------------

.. function:: ti.static_assert(cond, msg=None)

Like ``ti.static_print``, we also provide a static version of ``assert``:
``ti.static_assert``. It can be useful to make assertions on data types, dimensionality, and shapes.
It works whether ``debug=True`` is specified or not. When an assertion fails, it will
raise an ``AssertionError``, just like a Python-scope ``assert``.

For example:

.. code-block:: python

    @ti.func
    def copy(dst: ti.template(), src: ti.template()):
        ti.static_assert(dst.shape == src.shape, "copy() needs src and dst tensors to be same shape")
        for I in ti.grouped(src):
            dst[I] = src[I]
        return x % 2 == 1

Debugging Tips
--------------

> Debugging a Taichi program can be hard even with the builtin tools above.
> 
> Here we showcase some common bugs that one may encounter in a Taichi program:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Debugging a Taichi program can be hard even with the builtin tools above.
Here we showcase some common bugs that one may encounter in a Taichi program.
```

programmers carelessly used the wrong types. For example,

.. code-block:: python

    @ti.kernel
    def buggy():
        ret = 0  # 0 is an integer, so `ret` is typed as int32
        for i in range(3):
            ret += 0.1 * i  # i32 += f32, the result is still stored in int32!
        print(ret)  # will show 0

    buggy()

The code above shows a common bug due to Taichi's static type system.
The Taichi compiler should show a warning like:

.. code-block:: none

    [W 06/27/20 21:43:51.853] [type_check.cpp:visit@66] [$19] Atomic add (float32 to int32) may lose precision.

This means that Taichi cannot store a ``float32`` result precisely to ``int32``.
The solution is to initialize ``ret`` as a float-point value:

.. code-block:: python

    @ti.kernel
    def not_buggy():
        ret = 0.0  # 0 is a floating point number, so `ret` is typed as float32
        for i in range(3):
            ret += 0.1 * i  # f32 += f32. OK!
        print(ret)  # will show 0.6

    not_buggy()

Advanced Optimization
+++++++++++++++++++++

Taichi has an advanced optimization engine to make your Taichi kernel to be as fast as it could.

> But like what the ``gcc -O3`` does, sometimes advanced optimization can lead to bugs as it tries
> too hard. This includes runtime errors such as:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
But like what ``gcc -O3`` does, advanced optimization may occasionally lead to bugs as it tries
too hard. This includes runtime errors such as:
```

```RuntimeError: [verify.cpp:basic_verify@40] stmt 8 cannot have operand 7.```

You may use ``ti.core.toggle_advance_optimization(False)`` to turn off advanced
optimization and see if the issue still exists:

.. code-block:: python

    import taichi as ti

    ti.init()
    ti.core.toggle_advance_optimization(False)

    ...

> If turning off optimization fixed the issue, please report this bug on `GitHub <https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi/issues/new?labels=potential+bug&template=bug_report.md>`_ to help us improve, thanks for the support!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If turning off optimization fixes the issue, please report this bug on `GitHub <https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi/issues/new?labels=potential+bug&template=bug_report.md>`_ to help us improve, thanks for the support!
```

> If turning off optimization fixes the issue, please report this bug on `GitHub <https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi/issues/new?labels=potential+bug&template=bug_report.md>`_ to help us improve, thanks for the support!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If turning off optimization fixes the issue, please report this bug on `GitHub <https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi/issues/new?labels=potential+bug&template=bug_report.md>`_. Thank you!
```

Always use periods to terminate sentences :-)

Debugging
=========

> Debugging a massive-parallelized CPU/GPU program is not easy, so Taichi provides some

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Debugging a parallel program is not easy, so Taichi provides
```

> builtin utilities that hopefully could help you debug your Taichi program.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
builtin utilities that could hopefully help you debug your Taichi program.
```

Runtime ``print`` in kernel
---------------------------

Debug your program with ``print()`` in Taichi-scope. For example:

.. code-block:: python

    @ti.kernel
    def inside_taichi_scope():
        x = 233
        print('hello', x)
        #=> hello 233

        print('hello', x * 2 + 200)
        #=> hello 666

        print('hello', x, sep='')
        #=> hello233

        print('hello', x, sep='', end='')
        print('world', x, sep='')
        #=> hello233world233

        m = ti.Matrix([[2, 3, 4], [5, 6, 7]])
        print('m =', m)
        #=> m = [[2, 3, 4], [5, 6, 7]]

        v = ti.Vector([3, 4])
        print('v =', v)
        #=> v = [3, 4]

> For now, Taichi-scope ``print`` supports string, scalar, vector, and matrix expressions as the argument.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For now, Taichi-scope ``print`` supports string, scalar, vector, and matrix expressions as arguments.
```

> ``print`` in Taichi-scope maybe a little different from the ones in Python-scope, see below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``print`` in Taichi-scope may be a little different from ``print`` in Python-scope, see below.
```

.. warning::

>     For the **CPU, CUDA and Metal backend**, ``print`` will not work in Graphical Python Shells

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    For the **CPU, CUDA, and Metal backend**, ``print`` will not work in Graphical Python Shells
```

>     including IDLE and Jupyter notebook, since they print the result to console, instead of GUI.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    including IDLE and Jupyter notebook. This is because Taichi prints the outputs to the console instead of the GUI.
```

Author: ```suggestion
    including IDLE and Jupyter notebook. This is because these backends prints the outputs to the console instead of the GUI.
```

>     Taichi developers are trying to solve this now. Use **OpenGL backend** if you wish to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Taichi developers are trying to solve this now. Use the **OpenGL backend** if you wish to
```

    use ``print`` in IDLE / Jupyter.

.. warning::

    Note that ``print`` in Taichi-scope can only receive **comma-seperated paramater**. Neither f-string nor formatted string should be used. For example:
    .. code-block:: python
        import taichi as ti
        ti.init(arch=ti.cpu)
        a = ti.var(ti.f32, 4)

        @ti.kernel

>         def kern():

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        def foo():
```

            a[0] = 1.0
            print('a[0] = ', a[0]) # right
            print(f'a[0] = {a[0]}') # wrong, f-string is not supported
            print("a[0] = %f" % a[0]) # wrong, formatted string is not supported

>         kern()

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

        foo()
```

.. note::

>     For the **OpenGL and CUDA backend**, the printed result won't shows up until ``ti.sync()``:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    For the **OpenGL and CUDA backend**, the printed result will not show up until ``ti.sync()`` is called:
```

    .. code-block:: python

        import taichi as ti
        ti.init(arch=ti.cuda)

        @ti.kernel
        def kern():
            print('inside kernel')

        print('before kernel')
        kern()
        print('after kernel')
        ti.sync()
        print('after sync')

    obtains:

    .. code-block:: none

        before kernel
        after kernel
        inside kernel
        after

    Also note that host access or program end will also implicitly invoke for ``ti.sync()``.

Compile-time ``ti.static_print``
--------------------------------

> Sometimes it's also useful to print Python-scope objects and constants like datatype or SNode in Taichi-scope.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sometimes it is useful to print Python-scope objects and constants like data types or SNodes in Taichi-scope.
```

So, similar to ``ti.static`` we provide ``ti.static_print`` to print compile-time constants.

> It behaves the same as Python-scope ``print``, just being embedded into Taichi kernel.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is similar to Python-scope ``print``.
```

.. code-block:: python

    x = ti.var(ti.f32, (2, 3))
    y = 1

    @ti.kernel
    def inside_taichi_scope():
        ti.static_print(y)
        # => 1
        ti.static_print(x.shape)
        # => (2, 3)
        ti.static_print(x.data_type())
        # => DataType.float32
        for i in range(4):
                ti.static_print(i.data_type())
                # => DataType.int32
                # will only print once

Unlike ``print``, ``ti.static_print`` will only print the expression once at compile-time, and

> therefore has no runtime cost.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
therefore it has no runtime cost.
```

Runtime ``assert`` in kernel
----------------------------

> We may use ``assert`` statement in Taichi-scope. When assertion condition failed, a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Programmers may use ``assert`` statements in Taichi-scope. When the assertion condition failed, a
```

> ``RuntimeError`` will be raised to indicate error.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``RuntimeError`` will be raised to indicate the error.
```

To make ``assert`` work, first make sure you are using the **CPU backend**.
For performance reason, ``assert`` only works when ``debug`` mode is on, For example:

.. code-block:: python

    ti.init(arch=ti.cpu, debug=True)

    x = ti.var(ti.f32, 128)

    @ti.kernel
    def do_sqrt_all():
        for i in x:
            assert x[i] >= 0
            x[i] = ti.sqrt(x)

> When your debugging work is done, simply set ``debug=False``. Now ``assert`` will be ignored

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you are done with debugging, simply set ``debug=False``. Now ``assert`` will be ignored
```

> therefore no runtime overhead, making your program easy to debug without losing performance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and there will be no runtime overhead.
```

Compile-time ``ti.static_assert``
---------------------------------

Like ``ti.static_print``, we also provide a static version of ``assert``:

> ``ti.static_assert``, it can be useful to make assertion on data type / dimention / shape.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``ti.static_assert``. It can be useful to make assertions on data types, dimensionality, and shapes.
```

> It works no matter whether ``debug=True`` is specified. When assertion fails, it will

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It works whether ``debug=True`` is specified or not. When an assertion fails, it will
```

> raise ``AssertionError`` as a Python-scope ``assert`` does.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
raise an ``AssertionError``, just like a Python-scope ``assert``.
```

For example:

.. code-block:: python

    @ti.func
    def is_odd(x: ti.template()):

>         ti.static_assert(x.data_type() == ti.i32, "is_odd() is only supported for i32")

Reviewer 3: This is a bit misleading. This function seems to take a local scalar, but for now, Taichi cannot infer data types of local variables at compile-time.

Author: Oh sorry! Then how about:
```suggestion
    def copy(dst: ti.template(), src: ti.template()):
        ti.static_assert(dst.shape == src.shape, "copy() needs src and dst tensors to be same shape")
        for I in ti.grouped(src):
            dst[I] = src[I]
```

        return x % 2 == 1

> Tips for debugging
> ------------------

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Debugging Tips
--------------
```

Debugging a Taichi program can be hard even with the builtin tools above.

> Taichi developers are currently devoting themselves in improving error messages and warnings
> to help user find potential BUGs in their programs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

(There's no need to expose this low-level development detail to the users.)

> Here we collected some common BUGs that one might encounter with a Taichi program:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here we showcase some common bugs that one may encounter in a Taichi program:
```

> Static typing system
> ++++++++++++++++++++

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Static type system
++++++++++++++++++
```

> Taichi pretends that it's a dynamical-typed language like Python, but it's actually a
> statically-typed language which will be translated into high performance CPU/GPU instructions.
> 
> So the code behavior in Taichi-scope is actually very different from Python-scope!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Python code in Taichi-scope is translated into a statically typed language for high performance. This means code in Taichi-scope can have a different behavior compared with that in Python-scope, especially when it comes to types.
```

> Type of a variable is simply **determined at its first initialization and never changes later**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The type of a variable is simply **determined at its initialization and never changes later**.
```

> Although static-type provides better performance and simplicity, but may leads to BUGs if
> users not distinguished Taichi-scope from Python-scope, e.g.:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Although Taichi's static type system provides better performance, it may lead to bugs if
programmers carelessly used the wrong types. For example,
```

.. code-block:: python

    @ti.kernel
    def buggy():
        ret = 0  # 0 is a integer, so `ret` is typed as int32
        for i in range(3):
            ret += 0.1 * i  # i32 += f32, the result is still stored in int32!

>         print(ret)  # will shows 0

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        print(ret)  # will show 0
```

    buggy()

> The code above shows a common BUG due to the limitation of the static-type system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The code above shows a common bug due to Taichi's static type system.
```

The Taichi compiler should shows a warning like:

.. code-block:: none

    [W 06/27/20 21:43:51.853] [type_check.cpp:visit@66] [$19] Atomic add (float32 to int32) may lose precision.

> This means that it cannot store a ``float32`` result to ``int32``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This means that Taichi cannot store a ``float32`` result precisely to ``int32``.
```

> The solution is to type ``ret`` as ``float32`` at the first place:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The solution is to initialize ``ret`` as a float-point value:
```

Note that it can be either `f32` or `f64`, depending on the default float-point precision.

.. code-block:: python

    @ti.kernel
    def not_buggy():
        ret = 0.0  # 0 is a floating point number, so `ret` is typed as float32
        for i in range(3):

>             ret += 0.1 * i  # f32 += f32, OK!!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            ret += 0.1 * i  # f32 += f32. OK!
```

>             ret += 0.1 * i  # f32 += f32, OK!!
>         print(ret)  # will shows 0.6

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            ret += 0.1 * i  # f32 += f32. OK!
        print(ret)  # will show 0.6
```

    not_buggy()

> `@archibate <https://github.com/archibate>`_'s personal suggestion to prevent issues like this:
> 
> * Recall the ``float ret = 0;`` in C/C++, always use ``ret = float(0)`` on **initialization**,
>   and ``ret = int(0)`` for integers. So that you are always clear of what type every variable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Given the type system can warn the user of this issue, I think they should simply use `ret=0` or `ret=0.0`.

Advanced Optimization
+++++++++++++++++++++

Taichi has an advanced optimization engine to make your Taichi kernel to be as fast as it could.

> But like the ``gcc -O3`` does, sometimes advanced optimization can lead to BUGs as it tried

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
But like what the ``gcc -O3`` does, sometimes advanced optimization can lead to bugs as it tries
```

> too hard, including runtime errors like:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
too hard. This includes runtime errors such as:
```

```RuntimeError: [verify.cpp:basic_verify@40] stmt 8 cannot have operand 7.```

You may use ``ti.core.toggle_advance_optimization(False)`` to turn off advanced
optimization and see if the issue still exists:

.. code-block:: python

    import taichi as ti

    ti.init()

>     ti.core.toggle_advance_optimization()

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    ti.core.toggle_advance_optimization(False)
```

    ...

> If turning of optimization fixed the issue, please report this BUG on `GitHub <https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi/issues/new?labels=potential+bug&template=bug_report.md>`_ to help us improve, if you would like to.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If turning of optimization fixed the issue, please report this bug on `GitHub <https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi/issues/new?labels=potential+bug&template=bug_report.md>`_ to help us improve.
```
